everybody on the whole compound of
skillet this one in me she beat me up so
bad I mean blood was everywhere all over
everyone little it was so much blood
like somebody had committed a murder
what woman beat up a woman with our
hands and it'd be a bloodbath women
mayor dude I'm I'm saying I want inmate
to walk around this whole compound and
just jump on everybody you feel like you
will have to kill it and be to protect
yourself behind bars there are two sets
of rules
the prison protocol and the convict code
to survive one code you may have to
break the other over a three-year span
National Geographic followed the lives
of inmates and officers in the state of
Georgia when a paramilitary system is up
against convicted felons you said you're
dynamite you do or right inmate who's
really in charge this is the world of
hard time
[Music]
hi you crystals missing speak ma'am in
May inmate banks requested Street banger
Wow and make banks request permission to
speak ma'am
there's no okay an inmate Bank for
precious free no try it again
[Music]
it's intake day at Metro State Prison in
Atlanta Georgia the place every female
offender in the state begins hard time
and where they get their first taste of
Georgia's paramilitary system must looks
great at all times
you'll heels together be sprayed at 45
degrees and hands by your side yes sir
what's your problem man
next sorry mr. right
Hill coming through the back gate
I mean it's rude white men use when you
come through that back gate you don't
have to everything on the other side of
that gate it's uncomfortable form and
that's what prison should be present
should be where you can just come just
vacation just how you want to just get
away for a minute sir Amex price request
permission to speak sir it may Krupps
price request permission to speak sir
we were paralyzed salmon which six sir
by your leave sir real really don't care
what you did
we're gonna do our job your first night
here micros a prison intended their
little me tell you you need me nothing
you can't really say what you want to
say back to them electrician every
movement you make you're sitting there
shaking and every movement you make you
unsure yourself I mean if you're crying
wrong if you're laughs you're wrong if
you just sit there
you can't look what you want to look
your bag case is the weight on every
staff member by your memory yeah what
the hell am I gonna do now
[Music]
this is Metro state prison the first
stop for women doing time in Georgia
today there are 3600 female inmates in
the state Metro is a prison of two
worlds and two colors new arrivals
called diagnostics dress in white their
time here is about being broken down and
breaking in to the rules of the system
general population inmates dress in
brown many are classified as clothes
security here at Metro and mark their
time with the hustles and relationships
of convict life it can create a volatile
mix of rule breakers and short timers
predators and prey so all movement in
this maximum-security world is strictly
controlled from the moment arrivals walk
through the door we're not having to
catch top station announcer that's ahead
keep your head pretty hard who don't
heels together feet at a 45 degree angle
ready get it right whip your head up
what am i doing how did I get here I
still can't believe I'm in person I
can't believe I'm never in my whole life
that I would ever be be here ever every
inmate has their own story on how they
ended up here for Amy price it's a free
fall only four years ago she is a
straight-a student from a loving home
then party drug use spirals out of
control I started out doing oxycontin
pills and my friends were snorting them
so I started doing it too and then we
started smoking to build and then next
thing I knew I was shown up heroin in
Atlanta heel to heel the things I put
myself through to get the drugs it's
just it's insane
I stole for my family and so for my dad
I sold two guns from him to get money it
was one of those desperate days it makes
right shortly after that I went into
rehab and I called my dad and I told him
I don't want to say that rehab and I
just started walking down the street and
he said we'll go back and I'll come get
you and he came and picked me up and
took me straight to the sheriff's office
it's a tough love attempt to get her
claim the state of Georgia convicts Amy
of theft by taking after violating her
probation she lands behind bars fast
running a disaster now she's in a new
world far from home and at the beginning
of Metro's diagnostic process the start
of your time at Metro is an intense boot
camp-style introduction to prison
[Applause]
[Music]
basically we were written on kids who
like it or not we don't care about lies
and that person is I'll be obvious and
stricken beast
breaking in here is about marching
undergoing drills and learning to walk
the line the vision a camera over the
coming weeks the Diagnostics will
undergo a process known as
classification an examination of their
criminal records and current behavior
designed to figure out where in the
system each and mate belongs time here
ends one of three ways go home transfer
to another prison or gets stuck in
general population at Metro
[Music]
it's a state of limbo Julie Murphy knows
all too well just a number how you
really are
inmate whatever your last name is and a
number okay that's about weird litter
it's so straight I mean there is no
nonsense even going out of the chow hall
you're getting patted down coming in
you're getting your dignity take it from
you they're trying to make the repeaters
and the ones over here
realize they don't want us here this
ain't a place for us this is not going
to be easy rodeo anymore this is Julie's
third stint at Metro a third stay in the
system that for her has become a
revolving door in prison you learn more
than you did when you were out there I
mean you learn how to clip though you
learn how to steal you learn how to get
away with murder you learn how to run
checks you learned everything while
you're in here because convict stop you
just learned everything and they're like
oh maybe I should try it and then you go
out there with a new trick that is what
you need Oh getting bush doing it so you
come back so that's what happened to me
it's a rush at first once you break the
window to get in or if you kick the door
in however you decide to do it me I
brought the window in
this time the house she Rob's belongs to
her own mother Julie steals electronics
equipment later pawning it off for $700
she's convicted of two counts of
burglary earning her another year in
prison it's a continuation of her life
of crime on the streets and of the
reputation she's developed behind bars
my name's blue that's what everybody
calls me is blue since I've been here
before I know a lot of people here when
I'm walking down the compound
somebody's hollering my nicknames look
blue blue blue or calling my real name
and everybody knows me I'm calling
officers ma no but here at Metro being
known is not always a good thing
Julie comes here with a rough history of
fighting insubordination and playing the
prison game a record that in the past
put her in close security general
population at Metro it's like I'm a
walking ticking time bomb
I mean I love to fight always itching
for a fight if you want to argue with me
if you want to I'm not going to argue
I'm just gonna swing on you
go knock ya one-hitter quarter I'm
really waiting just to get my time
started because as soon as I get in them
Brown uniforms I'm going to do what I
want to do do my time the way I want to
do even if it means goes along now for
Julie this sentence has begun like many
others once again she's face to face
with a prison that's intolerant of rule
breakers if she's ready to push the
prison the prison is ready to push right
back it may step up across camp the
first day is coming to an end for Amy
price 125 safer and she's getting her
first dorm assignment do we have that
fine showing on the day okay Sam yeah
the ocean to do it they like that
[Music]
is unexplainable I'm only 21 and I have
a two-year-old I just need I never
thought I would be here
she will forego here
just the things that I've done and what
I put my family serve
I don't know but the only I mean I know
I'm going to get through it though so I
can just start over fresh when I get out
make them into my family but no place to
be for sure
[Music]
any freaking bodies and noted a long
cane Jackie get down to job
anybody no dogs okay
yes not much such a rose mayor beat it
when they talk jump up turn the idea at
Metro State Prison new arrivals are
getting another taste of Georgia's
paramilitary system getting lawbreakers
from the streets to follow rules behind
bars is a daily effort here yes I'm a
freaking line up and even the walk to
chow ha offers an opportunity for
officers like Jessica Williams to set
the newcomers straight can I hang it up
so
[Music]
they're going to start out with it came
good now right in place everywhere I
ever see a watch me we do not play a
metro we're going to make sure that you
follow the rules and regulations that's
the bottom line we got a job to do and
we don't do it whether you like it or
not the no-nonsense approach is about
more than just discipline for
disciplines sake it's about the
rehabilitation that's at the core of
Georgia's correctional philosophy it
up.once you into those back gates
everything start out your whole thought
process you know mental stability that
your way of living star so the way you
do they started you will be a better
person when you're leaving we're going
to make sure that the first time or amy
price it's a message that may hit home
what got me here and what am i going to
change when i get out because like if I
don't change anything then I'm going to
be back here
I want to have a normal life that's what
I want like a job at family I mean I
have a lot of dreams and I know I can do
that I know I can do that but I just
have to change my whole lifestyle I just
have to start over completely over Aimee
spent nearly five months in county jail
before coming to Metro time with limited
visits and little contact with the
outside world this is my two-year-old
her name is jela I can't wait to see her
I was locked up when this picture was
taken
I miss Easter I missed her birthday
I miss my sister's wedding
I miss my dad's birthday but I'll have a
chance to make up everything no one been
to prison in my family no one's really
had a drug problem I mean I was brought
up in a really good home
I had a great mother and a wonderful
father I don't know I just made wrong
decisions really do as you say when you
tell how you tell and why are you so sad
[Applause]
you will be a better fighter when you
leave you're correct you will be a
better mother when you leave there
correct you will be a better faster when
you make up you will be a better dull
when you leave there's people here that
are so ok with this situation they're
used to it some people have been here
like four times I will not be one of
those people I couldn't even imagine I
would never want to go through again
[Applause]
okay Dorn Julie Murphy is settling into
her time as well with her past in and
out of the system
she's landed among friends she talked
about oh we already we gonna get that
out to ballet together so we knew each
other so we three mother's husband yeah
we didn't want to be over Union but it
happens in women's prison having a
history means having a role and already
Julie and her selys are assuming their
eyes they all my kids just what they are
in my kid's gonna do the arm ladies are
my boys and the same wrong with the
girls so I called a boy and girl these
are two wall is in the room right here
it's all or most of my brother we stick
together when there's issues we we deal
with them inside the room because we're
like a little small family
for Julie it's a living arrangement that
helps to pass her time and diagnostics
but she knows there's a better way in a
matter of weeks the diagnostic process
ends and with it a move to another world
exchanging the white jumpsuit for the
hustles in drama prisons general
population
[Music]
Metro State Prison in Atlanta Georgia is
home to two worlds the newly arrived
Diagnostics were being broken into the
system and a general population that
houses hundreds of maximum security
inmates including those who can't be
managed by any other prison in the state
they might discreetly you want to start
seeing all three of them your ass not
gonna keep happening here no that girl
is going to give your child with his
turn at Metro general population is made
up of lifers and violent offenders and
chronic rule breakers
[Music]
on jail Muhammad is all the above she's
in on a grisly crime that starts as a
simple fight with her girlfriend she was
in a foul mood like always we got to
fight in the car
pull it over she's still fighting me God
car walk to the gas station that's when
the driver pumped 65 cents worth of
gasoline and witnesses say it appeared
that she poured it on the passenger on
jail pulls out a lighter and sets her
girlfriend on fire what prosecutors call
one of the cruelest murders they've ever
seen there was little doubt of her guilt
prosecutors showed this video of police
investigating the discovery of the badly
burned woman when Muhammad drove right
by them by the time police caught up
with her the car was about to burn up
after I took her away on my knowledge
like everything went to a blur as to
count more in malice murder the sentence
is life without parole cry and try
crying in the crowd my mom cried and
that's it I'm crashing
[Music]
on jail receives one of the state's
deepest sentences life without parole on
the count of malice murder at first
you'd be like what damn I got this heavy
sentence and it'd be a burden on your
shoulders and you know it's like a burn
you walk around just burn and you do
whatever you can to lighten the load
then after a while you'd be like me
everything that go along with it it's my
life i'ma leave if I want to
it's been eight years since on jail has
seen the streets now in prison she tries
to find freedom however she can by
breaking the rules to get where she
wants to go high I'll go with a lifetime
to serve it's a way to hold on to what
little independence she has left
something on jail calls skating ice
skating around as much as possible
so I go through every snack every meal
every whatever they call in time don't
open them out if it does crack open and
they don't know honestly like the doors
line I do finding this area I guess up
the building and do whatever have to do
you see where I want to be I'm making my
business you know today
Angelle has found her 10 minutes of
freedom outside the prison's 5:00 p.m.
pill call it's an opportunity to cross
paths with inmates and other buildings
call out to girlfriends and catch up on
gossip and jujube we sell out today it's
a little girlfriend mommy
whatever restrictions they put on it
make a way to get around those
restriction repaired me I can't see this
person will make a way to feed his
person in regards what she's doing
anything I have to do to get around him
that's what I'm wounded by enemies
inmates like on jail are why Metro is
the strictest women's prison in the
state and she is just one of many
maximum security inmates who went to do
time their way
[Music]
it's a world Julie Murphy has learned
she'll be joining the move to general
population marks both an end and a
beginning a goodbye to her diagnostic
prison family at the beginning of doing
time on her own terms
I'm so excited because I don't have to
March no more I don't have to cockade it
when one gets in trouble I don't have to
get in trouble no more if I get in
trouble is just me walk around like a GP
three will to do whatever I want to do I
had more free reign because not a
diagnostic anymore I could run around a
compound where pleased by everybody
with the restrictions of the white world
behind her Julie is looking to get back
to what she does best living the life of
a prison player what is a player okay a
player is somebody who has several
different girlfriends in the compound
and just tries to talk to everybody and
I'm one of those I like to like to play
the field
you have GP girlfriends you have
diagnostic girlfriends why do you write
to my ear on the range with somebody you
go to chil with me I try to do it on
opposite Dyson and make the new mercies
from diagnostic GP it's a role that
comes with a reputation when she
developed over two previous sentences at
Metro
what's the what happen how you get moto
gp gbp0 this Wow heard about about will
go today
yeah I'm a little player
action I hope they open I am I like I
like women so I like a variety I can't
I'm not the type to settle down I know
you like one decided okay all the villas
and resolve your mustard I'm not one to
take home the month from today Julie the
diagnostic has once again become Julie
the player now in brown she'll hit the
compound yet again to break hearts and
play the relationship game evening at
metro means an end to the day's rigid
schedule and for some a chance to get
out of the dorms
tonight lieutenant Alton Jamison is
checking locks securing doors and
getting ready for GP rec time all clear
that's right Jim call Jim Cole with yak
bail on the rain fell on the range I
want Jim call let's go let's go let's go
Oh stairs TP directly Nelvana range
military not a partisan oh and the
lockdown word of Metro Jim Hall offers
inmates a chance to exercise and catch
up with friends from across the compound
you got to do something to release this
thing because it's just like with
anything if you in a cage for a long
time and you ain't got no withered at
least that thing I'm going to blow up
whether it be on staff or be on another
MF soldier this is a way to get out
relax whatever they had in intentions
are doing when they was in the dorm
where it could have been a fight
anticipated it could have been some
homosexual activity anticipated it could
have been something you just picture a
robbery or breaking into a lock or doing
something like that then I for Jim call
and didn't ship everybody Oh jump off so
the freedom is a highlight for most
inmates and a time for officers like
Jameson to be on high alert
I'm looking waiting for fish's activity
you know so everything in here
suspicious to me
they don't play for fun it's always
something involved in it maybe a you
know they bought a you know a trade you
know or they bet so if you see them
playing cause it might not just be a
regular claw game someone's going to old
something whoever loses so
hey Jerry bill de la dia but it makes
it's back to the dorms for Jamison a
successful end to the night in a quiet
night good night they got the exercise
and hopefully they go back to dorm well
read a book or read a Bible and go to
sleep it it's been a good night to me
hard to get to
it's been almost a month since Amy price
first arrives in prison she's finding
ways to pass the time without settling
in every day gets easier but I don't
make myself too comfortable and hear
them you can do things to pass the time
and stuff like that but it'll Midford
yeah it's temporary Amy's time in
Diagnostics has been about learning the
rules of the prison and learning the
ropes from other inmates I need to get
rid of my hired cars first right and I
got a jaundice cartwright you know if
people feel that they can take advantage
of you then they're going to the prison
strictly limits the possessions of
diagnostic inmates luxuries like perfume
makeup and even playing cards are
considered contraband so the only way to
get them is through a GP inmate now
let's go to the ghetto and like there's
somebody on every corner and you can
just like roll anyway don't get anything
that's how it is here Diagnostics just
happen to be like the best customers
because we can't we don't have access to
anything
and yours Bad's like we keep going back
to them anyway it's 95 to zero I just
started playing that's why yes despite
the administration's efforts to crack
down on the illegal trades the
underground inmate economy is a mainstay
of Georgia's prison system even the
wealthiest inmates are limited to $60 a
week to buy goods from the prison store
for anything above that the only
solution is to hustle hustle czar the
inmate equivalent of a job behind bars
and can range from braiding hair and
washing clothes to dealing in cigarettes
and other contraband I kind of feel
called to steal my medicine and sell it
just trying to make sure the police
ain't looking I take it and put it in a
loaf and I have it on my song and here's
that look right there yeah
but the two-tiered world of metro means
that here one hustle rises above the
rest the illegal trade between GP and
diagnostic inmates it's a business
relationship that thrives on those with
experience taking advantage of those
with none what am I to make us because
they want you related GPS at the court
phone store products called the dollars
and change which you can see me and I
probably want to see your pet file and
we will probably service to the
Diagnostics for about T's $10 and I'm
not so sweet I love that night you know
they all want t-shirts I use t show you
to sell you t-shirts panel it's storge
for on jail Mohammed time to pick up the
packages and commissary items as you'll
mark up and resell to Diagnostics for
the veteran hustler this is paid a price
on my packages loop gloves make up
something no good John where they can
they pay good money for these stuff and
I sell it to him
you know hey you wanna I'm set it to
Mohammed you made it today without
getting put out of lines without talking
to put out a right well Donna there's
one of me
today's shopping day is a special case
an inmate and lockdown
Adon jail to buy store goods on her
behalf trusting her to hold them until
she returns to GP but on jail has other
plans so this what I'm going to do right
because I ordered this girl stuff this
is girl stuff right I'm gonna give her
some that I want oh do not you know
that's just the bottom line on jail is
keeping most of the store items for
herself a prison robbery metro-style
this girl's my bunkmate I had great
intention on giving her everything you
know but we got separated she went back
to lockdown a day and I decided to keep
half the stuff I'm listening to that
sack rocker yeah I would do this on the
street if I was stupid enough to give me
the money he doesn't have with we're not
friends we don't even know each other I
don't know your last name
you don't even know my first name so
that's a president LeDoux when on jail
is ready the goods will hit the compound
to be sold and the Hustle won't continue
I have a life in it so everybody comes
knows you still here well I'll make make
this my own little place I have a
fantastic imagination
across camp Julie Murphy's time and GP
is underway so it's time for her to dive
into a hustle all her own
in a world without men that means
cashing in on her boyish looks there is
not that many of the voyage types stage
as we call ourselves there's not many of
us on the compound to every stood
there's like five women at least it's an
image she works hard to maintain you
have to look good in this compound your
your swagger got to be on point you know
hair got to be me face guys be why
should I look presentable cuz I mean
don't know see way I want to talk to a
dusty boy there's onions
it's a role that julie has perfected
over three sentences behind bars a role
that she translates into making her time
more comfortable okay thank you today I
have you got me bless me that's a good
thing Thanks
yeah my life I might have a can make you
a good night
the men and women flopped to you there
nurturers because they're women half of
our mothers they're away from their
husbands boyfriends whatever so they
feel the need to take care of their mate
I get what I want from these women which
is attention affection and commissary in
saying my groceries they go feeding her
stud persona gets Julie what she wants
trading affection for short-term comfort
be careful because blue spectroscopy
[Applause]
it ain't happenin diamond is ooh and
when walking my will be happy you end up
as I am on this the toughest female
prison in the state of Georgia
maintaining control is an everyday
battle we receive a lot of headaches
we're just fine without math we deal
with him every day
this is a problem captain
it's a battle waged in the dorms on the
walks and in the cells of Metro through
daily inspections regular surges and a
heavy officer presence on the ground
but will you be there and that husband
you just make you prevailed amid some
things you don't want to do on it a
population filled with violent offenders
and chronic rule-breakers some inmates
become too difficult to handle
[Music]
leaving the prison's take more extreme
measures and leaving inmates to serve
time in the hole
Metro's special management unit is like
a jail within the prison here inmates
are on lockdown
23 hours a day which means no movement
and no visits to the store
it's the place every rule breaker can
expect to do some time especially
inmates like on JAL Mohammed
I got lifestyle you know plus 13 is
nothing that they can do to me I can go
to dot now like everybody else and you
wrote oh just like everybody else but
I'm not gonna care like everybody else
this time the veteran convict has made a
rookie mistake she was out of place at
another dorm looking for a fight instead
she found a stint in the hole
well usually I get away with everything
like that color once in a lifetime I
care about you things in life in my kids
my mom made a major points in my life
that's it
everything else is irrelevant it comes
and goes nothing really matters to me
I miss collecting some money that's the
only thing I hate about being here other
than that nothing I'm gonna do it anyway
it doesn't matter if I get locked down
write me up I'm gonna do it anyway
school cruelty record for inmates like
on jail the whole may hold little threat
but for others it might just have a
lasting effect got a little trouble they
ship my friends so I kind of met it up
and here I sit in lockdown Julie Murphy
is in the hole as well this time because
she broke one of her cardinal rules by
developing strong feelings for another
inmate
well my girlfriend she got shipped to
another facility when they packed her
stuff I've made a little scene brought
the captain the warden deputy warden
cert team everybody has to see that I
feel like I just took a part of me from
you
she'll spend 14 days in isolation away
from the relationships puzzles and
freedom of the compound a sentence that
seems to be having a chilling effect on
the self-proclaimed player there is no
beating the system here this sentence
has been the hardest time I've done and
any time after
the last two times have been here I
didn't break I didn't that's why I keep
doing the same things
I broke
I'm glad I finally broke
it's hard it is but I have to grow
[Music]
across camp
Amy price is preparing to me with a
parole officer and anxious to find out
about her own future hopefully I can be
in a couple months if not sooner so what
I prayed for anyway the interview
process is designed to assess an inmates
history and current behavior to help
determine their chances on the outside
for Amy the risk factors are clear hey
how are you I'm fine thanks and you good
good good we're going to start the
parole interview my name is Agnes
McGriff I'm a parole investigator
for the parole board you ever used any
type drugs alcohol included yes and
alcohol heroin cocaine marijuana I've
done every drug but heroin was my
problem I started using oxycontin at 16
but I started doing heroin about three
years ago Saul's about 17 okay
have you had any substance abuse
treatment yes but I didn't complete the
program those inpatient rehab facility I
couldn't give you a good reason why it's
just bad choices
I'm so excited and anxious to get out
but at the same time I'm nervous I'm
nervous and I'm scared because the
streets are still out there the drugs
are still there but I mean I'm
definitely ready to leave but at the
same time I just hope that I'm ready I
hope that I'm ready to him to handle the
world the way I'm supposed to
[Music]
inside the razor wire of metro state
prison lies a world constantly in motion
each week new inmates arrived and others
walk out the gate and whether moving on
to other prisons or returning to the
streets the lessons learned here will
leave their mark
[Music]
for Amy price it's an experience she may
never forget no longer at Metro amy has
been assigned to a medium security
prison-- north of atlanta but the
lessons of Diagnostics continue to play
out in her mind my journey has been
scary but at the same time it's the best
thing that's ever happened to me
this was my wake-up call this was my
rock-bottom I feel like I'd much rather
be in here than where I was out there
because I was just I was going nowhere
fast
I would have been dead in probably three
months my dad I was mad at him for you
know doing what he did for basically
sending me to jail but he didn't send me
the job I got myself here but he saved
my life and I haven't told him that yet
and I won't until I get out of these out
of these gates
I want him to know that he saved my life
as Amy price settles into the rest of
her sentence another inmate is facing an
end back at Metro Julie Murphy is
getting out
[Music]
after four months in prison two weeks of
it served in the whole her third
sentence is finally over
I'm actually a bundle of nerves right
now stomach's in a knot so sick my last
two sentences I didn't feel this way
going home now it's like okay it's for
me here and after like this time I'm
gonna make a change yeah long Centurion
PG I come back well I think coming back
this third time really has helped me I
don't think I can run everything now I'm
tired not getting no younger am i
turning point to change what are things
I've learned this time in prison help
keep me in the right path
[Music]
during the guests way I'm your vault
made release day has come for on jail
Mohammed as well but rather than leaving
the gates she's getting out of
segregation
returning to the only world she'll ever
know I'm missing one CD two TVs at the
bush I know y'all and got nowhere
calm down late I want to insinuating a
damn thing
I don't think too much about outside
might dream about it but it's like to
sit around talk about outside Britain
you know sit around talk about what
you're not gonna do no more for a while
[Music]
talk about what you used to do you still
don't matter in the work used to is
yesterday yesterday doesn't matter
anymore but I did yesterday doesn't
matter
I need five minutes ago does a new mess
so why talk about it
[Music]
future see I don't know what to tell
Zhaan see I mean see two minutes now on
ax men I might be in lockdown that I
have no idea but the future may hold
when I walk out that game there's nobody
to tell me what to do anymore
and they're given a lot of chances look
thank you
[Music]
three three three three
all your frickin reservation let's go
you gonna be good I'm not going to write
this time haven't I had enough
[Music]